Getting Started section rehaul (#28090)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/getting-started/getting-started-prometheus.md

+++
title = "Getting started with Grafana and Prometheus"
description = "Guide for getting started with Grafana"
keywords = ["grafana", "intro", "guide", "started"]
type = "docs"
aliases = ["/docs/grafana/latest/guides/gettingstarted","/docs/grafana/latest/guides/getting_started"]
[menu.docs]
identifier = "getting_started-grafana-prometheus"
parent = "guides"
weight = 300
+++

> # Getting Started with Grafana and Prometheus

Reviewer: Should this be "_Get_ started ..."?

Author: We do not use gerunds when talking about tasks. For example, "Add data source", which is probably not right, you are "explaining" how to do a "task".

In this case, the section is about "Getting started", so this should stay.

Reviewer: Gotcha. I thought this was considered a task topic, hence my comment. I believe it should be in sentence case though.

Reviewer 2: Correct. All headings should be in sentence case.

Author: Diana and I decided to go with Getting Started > With Grafana and Prometheus

> # Getting Started with Grafana and Prometheus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Getting started with Grafana and Prometheus
```

Author: Done

> Prometheus is an open-source systems monitoring and alerting toolkit for which Grafana includes built-in support. This topic walks you through the steps to create a series of dashboards in Grafana displaying system metrics of a host monitored by Prometheus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus is an open source monitoring system and is supported by Grafana out-of-the-box. This topic walks you through the steps to create a series of dashboards in Grafana that display system metrics for a server that's monitored by Prometheus.
```

> You can also configure your Grafana instance in the cloud to display system metrics. For more information, refer to the [Grafana Cloud](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/) documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also configure your Grafana instance in the cloud to display system metrics. For more information, refer to [Grafana Cloud](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/).
```

"documentation" feels redundant?

Reviewer 3: With the proposed changes I'd expect to be taken to either the product itself or a product page, not documentation, so I'm not sure I agree about the redundancy.

Reviewer: Then I'd suggest that we link to the relevant documentation section for configuring Grafana Cloud rather than the start page. For example:

> You can also configure your Grafana instance in the cloud to display system metrics. For more information, refer to [Metrics — Prometheus](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/metrics/prometheus/).

"Metrics — Prometheus" isn't a great link text, but since we try to use the heading of the document we link to as link text, maybe we should consider renaming the heading to something more descriptive.

Reviewer 2: @matthewhelmke, what are your thoughts on the use of "cloud" in this context?

Reviewer 4: I would prefer, with a link to the cloud docs from "Grafana Cloud":

You have the option to configure a Grafana Cloud instance to display system metrics without having to host Grafana yourself.

Reviewer 4: The direct answer to the question is "I'm not a fan." Hence my alternate suggestion. :smiley:

Author: Updated per Matthew's suggestion as we are talking about the clouds docs here.

## Step 1: Install Grafana and build your first dashboard

Use the instructions in [Getting started with Grafana]({{< relref "getting-started.md" >}}) to:
- Install Grafana

> - Login to Grafana

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Log in to Grafana
```

Reviewer 2: Each of these bullets is a sentence. Please add periods.

Reviewer 2: Please address this change.

Author: Done

- Create your first dashboard

> ## Step 2: Download Prometheus and node exporter

Reviewer 2: Isn't node_exporter a proper noun?

@#@%ing proper nouns in lowercase, grrr. I blame Apple for starting the trend.

Author: Yes, we will use node_exporter and windows_exporter, will update the style guide.

> Prometheus, like Grafana, can be installed on many different operating systems. Refer to the [Prometheus download page](https://prometheus.io/download/) which lists all stable versions of Prometheus components. Download the following components:

Reviewer 5: Nit: Comma before "which".

Reviewer 2: Agreed.

Author: Done

> Prometheus, like Grafana, can be installed on many different operating systems. Refer to the [Prometheus download page](https://prometheus.io/download/) which lists all stable versions of Prometheus components. Download the following components:

Reviewer 5: Perhaps mention somewhere that Node Exporter doesn't come with a binary for MS Windows (and doesn't really work there – https://github.com/prometheus-community/windows_exporter is what to use there, but it might be too confusing to mention that in this tutorial).

Author: I will add this as a note. Thank you for sharing the workaround for Windows users.

Author: Added link to windows_exporter

>  - [prometheus](https://prometheus.io/download/#prometheus)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/download/#prometheus)
```

Author: Done

 - [node_exporter](https://prometheus.io/download/#node_exporter)

## Step 3: Install Prometheus node_exporter

> Prometheus Node Exporter is a widely used tool that exposes system metrics. Install node_exporter on all hosts you want to monitor. For instructions on how to install node_exporter, refer to the [Installing and running the Node Exporter](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/node-exporter/#installing-and-running-the-node-exporter) section in Prometheus documentation.

Reviewer 5: Nit: Three different spellings of node exporter so far:
- "node exporter"
- "Node Exporter"
- "node_exporter"

I'd say each is fine, but we should try to use one spelling consistently.

Author: Good catch! We will go with "node_exporter".

Reviewer 2: @achatterjee-grafana , please add this to the Word usage section of the Grafana style guide.

> >Note: The instructions in the referenced topic is intended for Linux users. You may have to alter the instructions slightly depending on your operating system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The instructions in the referenced topic is intended for Linux users. You may have to alter the instructions slightly depending on your operating system.
```

Reviewer 5: As said above, for MS Windows, you would use something completely different than Node Exporter (https://github.com/prometheus-community/windows_exporter). Not sure how to deal with that.

Author: Thank you for raising the point. That is why I added the note.

Author: Updated Note format and added link to windows_exporter.

## Step 4: Install and configure Prometheus

> 1. Install Prometheus following instructions in the [Installation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/installation/) topic in Prometheus documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install Prometheus by following the instructions in the [Installation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/installation/) topic in Prometheus documentation.
```

Reviewer 2: ...in the Prometheus...

Author: Added "the"

> 1. Next, configure Prometheus to monitor the hosts where you installed node_exporter. In order to do this, configure prometheus.yaml file located in Prometheus's home directory. Here is an example of the code you will need to add.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Configure Prometheus to monitor the hosts where you installed node_exporter. To do this, configure prometheus.yaml in Prometheus's home directory. Here's an example of the code you need to add.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion 
1. Configure Prometheus to monitor the hosts where you installed node_exporter. To do this, modify Prometheus's YAML configuration file. Prometheus's configuration file is often called `prometheus.yml` and can be found in either `/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml` or the directory where you've installed Prometheus. Here's an example of the code you need to add.
```

My rewrite is not very good either, but what I want to convey is that _home directory_ for UNIX environments refers specifically to the directory in `/etc/passwd` which is assigned to the `prometheus` user. On a typical Debian/Ubuntu installation, this'd be `/var/lib/prometheus`, but the configuration file lives in `/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml`. The second instruction (where I replace "home directory" to "where you've installed Prometheus") should be more Windows-y, but I'm actually not sure. It is true for when you compile Prometheus and just run it with `./prometheus` on UNIX.

Ultimately, it's controlled by the `--config.file` flag, but since that's often not seen by the user there's no easy way to tell them what to look for 🙁

Reviewer 5: IIRC the default is to use the file `prometheus.yml` (_not_ `prometheus.yaml`) in the _current work directory_.

Prometheus itself has no notion of checking the `/etc` directory or any home directory as listed in `/etc/passwd`.

Reviewer 3: Yes, that's my understanding as well. I used "the directory where you've installed Prometheus" in place of cwd because Windows and because I couldn't think of the correct term. The `/etc` directory part came from the Docker instructions and also Debian's packaging (not that I think that we should use third-party packagers as an example of how to correctly set something up).

https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/master/Dockerfile#L26
https://packages.debian.org/sid/amd64/prometheus/filelist

Maybe 👇  would be more correct?

```suggestion
1. Configure Prometheus to monitor the hosts where you installed node_exporter. To do this, modify Prometheus's configuration file. By default Prometheus looks for the file `prometheus.yml` in the current working directory. Some Prometheus installers changes this to `/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml`. Here's an example of the configuration you need to add.
```

Reviewer 5: I think it's correct this way. Perhaps mention the command line flag, which is also used in the example below then, e.g.

"… By default Prometheus looks for the file `prometheus.yml` in the current working directory. This behavior can be changed via the `--config.file` command line flag. For example, some Prometheus installers use it to set the config file to `/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml`. …"

Author: Thank you @sakjur and @beorn7, I have updated the instructions as per your suggestion.

   ```
    # A scrape configuration containing exactly one endpoint to scrape from node_exporter running on a host:
    scrape_configs:
        # The job name is added as a label `job=<job_name>` to any timeseries scraped from this config.
        - job_name: 'node'

        # metrics_path defaults to '/metrics'
        # scheme defaults to 'http'.

        static_configs:
        - targets: ['<hostname>:9100']
   ```

1. Start the Prometheus service:
   ```
    ./prometheus --config.file=./prometheus.yml
   ```

## Step 5: Check Prometheus metrics in Grafana Explore view

> In your Grafana instance, go to the [explore]({{< relref "../explore/index.md" >}}) view and build queries to experiment with the metrics you want to monitor. Here you can also debug issues related to collecting metrics from Prometheus. Pay special attention to the [Prometheus-specific Features]({{< relref "../explore/_index.md#prometheus-specific-features" >}}) to avail custom querying experience for Prometheus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your Grafana instance, go to [Explore]({{< relref "../explore/index.md" >}}) to experiment with the metrics you want to monitor. Here you can also debug issues related to collecting metrics from Prometheus. Pay special attention to the [Prometheus-specific Features]({{< relref "../explore/_index.md#prometheus-specific-features" >}}) to avail custom querying experience for Prometheus.
```

> to avail custom querying experience for Prometheus

I don't understand this?

Reviewer 2: Neither do I. Do you mean to use the Prometheus-specific features?

Also, lowercase "features."

Author: Can you clarify what you do not follow? Thanks!

Author: The Explore topic has this specific section, which I referenced.

Made the other changes.

## Step 6: Start building dashboards

> Now that you have a curated list of queries, create [dashboards]({{< relref "../dashboards/_index.md" >}}) to render system metrics monitored by Prometheus. The following image shows a simple dashboard with three panels showing some system metrics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that you have a curated list of queries, create [dashboards]({{< relref "../dashboards/_index.md" >}}) to render system metrics monitored by Prometheus. The following image shows a dashboard with three panels showing some system metrics.
```

Reviewer 2: Two things:
1. You might want to link to Add a dashboard rather than the top-level of Dashboards.
2. When you install Prometheus and Node Exporter or Windows Exporter, there are recommended dashboards for some of. Prometheus 2.0 dashboards for Prometheus, and a bunch of user-created dashboard plugins for the exporters. 

@marcusolsson, are there official plugins for the exporters, or should we just recommend to users that they do a search in our Plugins page?

Reviewer: Exporters send metrics to Prometheus, so there's no need for exporter-specific plugins.

Author: Confirmed with Diana, no Add a dashboard topic created yet.

Author: Added note for #2.

## Step 1: Install Grafana and build your first dashboard

Use the instructions in [Getting started with Grafana]({{< relref "getting-started.md" >}}) to:
- Install Grafana.
- Log in to Grafana.
- Create your first dashboard.

## Step 2: Download Prometheus and node_exporter

Prometheus, like Grafana, can be installed on many different operating systems. Refer to the [Prometheus download page](https://prometheus.io/download/), which lists all stable versions of Prometheus components. Download the following components:
 - [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/download/#prometheus)
 - [node_exporter](https://prometheus.io/download/#node_exporter)

## Step 3: Install Prometheus node_exporter

Prometheus node_exporter is a widely used tool that exposes system metrics. Install node_exporter on all hosts you want to monitor. For instructions on how to install node_exporter, refer to the [Installing and running the node_exporter](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/node-exporter/#installing-and-running-the-node-exporter) section in Prometheus documentation.

> >**Note**: The instructions in the referenced topic is intended for Linux users. You may have to alter the instructions slightly depending on your operating system. For example, if you are on Windows, use the [windows_exporter](https://github.com/prometheus-community/windows_exporter) instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**: The instructions in the referenced topic is intended for Linux users. You may have to alter the instructions slightly depending on your operating system. For example, if you are on Windows, use the [windows_exporter](https://github.com/prometheus-community/windows_exporter) instead.
```

Author: Done
